# Practice Impractical

The software development community is largely concerned with practical endeavors. Our conferences are focused on how do things better at our jobs. Our schools are focused on how to get a job. Our meetups are only attended if the topic is something people can go and use at their job. Everything we do must be reframed, made to be practical, made to fit what people are looking to do at their jobs.

This obsession with only practical matters actually has some practical downsides. Our day jobs are spent mired in legacy code, dealing with duct taped together software. Our mode of existence is reactionary. We sit by as the business makes poor decisions after poor decisions, our code gets worse, the amount of work needed to create features becomes harder. Something that may have take 1 hour now takes 1 week. We are paralyzed in the face of ever changing priorities. We rush our software out the doors, gathering ever increasing levels of "technical debt".

While the picture I paint is bleak, I don't think it is uncommon or unrealistic. But what is perhaps controversial is assertion that this is a consequence of our obsession with the practical. Wouldn't seeking practical advice on how to improve be the exact way to fix these issues? Wouldn't developers being educated in best practices stop this horrible accretion of technical debt? I think not. While technical debt can be made by uninformed or unexperienced developers, we can't pretend this is its only source. Technical debt is often created by the informed developer who must make a time trade off. The business has demands that can only be met by taking shortcuts, paths that the developer themselves know are bad.

But the fact that informed developers can create technical debt is not strong enough a claim. My claim is further, obsession with practical matters leads inevitably to technical debt. Or to put it another way, lack of focus on the theoritical leads to technical debt. To be clear, by theoritical I do not mean theoritical computer science. Most technical debt has nothing to do with theoritical computer science issues. Sure understanding of these topics can make us better developers, but they do not in themselves prevent technical debt.

What I mean by theoritical are meta questions about software development itself. What is programming? Why should we program? Does programming have a purpose? How do we evaluate if a program is good or bad? 