# The Future of Programming

As professional developers, most of our time is spent thinking about the near future. We are cemented into our current workflow by policy, social cohesion, or pragmatic considerations. While we may be constantly seeking to improve, new tools and libraries come with a certain amount of cost. It is simply not practical to completely change the way we are doing things and so we end up with small incremental improvements.

We will look at what could happen if we gave up these small incremental improvements and looked at radically different ways of programming. We will explore three languages, all currently in development, that are particularly interesting. The first, Idris, explores the idea of code that can guarantee that is free of all sorts of bugs. With Idris, we may in the future be able to have a proof that our code is secure. Next we will look at Eve, an experiment in language design that asks what our programs would be like if 1) code ordering didn't matter 2) all our programs were edited live 3) we could write the same systems in order of magnitude less code and less time. Finally we will explore Unison, a language that allows us to control thousand of machines in just a few lines of code. No longer would we need microservices, a new service is a just a line of code away.

## Secondary Proposal (Lead Dev Conf)

As leads we are constantly evaluated new technologies in order to improve our craft and to discover what will be the best fit for our teams. More often than not, however, we limit ourselves to the immediate future. What sorts of tools and technologies we can adopt are limited by policy, social cohesion, and pragmatic considerations. In this talk we will free ourselves from those constraints. Rather than looking for new technologies directly applicable today, we will investigate bold new approaches to software development that take us beyond incremental improvement.

In this talk we will focus on three programming languages that provide new ways to solve real issues we face today. But more than just providing solutions to problems, these languages ask thought provoking questions that can impact the way we code and the way we build systems. The first, Idris, explores the idea of code that can guarantee that is free of all sorts of bugs. This includes simple bugs like off by one errors and null reference exceptions, but it extends itself to verifying our business logic and certifying that our program is secure. Next we will explore Unison, a language that allows us to control thousand of machines in just a few lines of code. No longer would we need microservices, a new service is a just a line of code away. Finally we will look at Eve, an experiment in language design that asks what our programs would be like if 1) code ordering didn't matter 2) all our programs were edited live 3) we could write the same systems in order of magnitude less code and less time. 