# Conceptual Preservation

In the last post, I mentioned how we ought to learn from philosophers who have already explored these notions of Conceptual Engineering. Here we will do exactly that by focusing on the work by philosopher Matthew Lindauer [Conceptual engineering as concept preservation](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/rati.12280). Despite the title Lindauer is not arguing that conceptual engineering is merely concept preservation, but rather that concept preservation is an important aspect of Conceptual Engineering. In fact, Lindauer's paper focuses on concept preservation because as he sees it, it may be the easiest, or clearest case of conceptual engineering. 

Lindauer brings up concept preservation as a way to combat some constraints that some philosophers have placed on Conceptual Engineering. Most notably, Herman Cappelen has claimed that we don't really know how concepts change over time (Inscrutability), nor can we control how they change over time (Lack of Control). Lindauer wants to suggest that Inscrutability and Lack of Control are much less of a concern when it comes to concept preservation than to re-engineering and de novo engineering efforts. For this article, we won't dive into his argument here, but keeping this as background is important as we think about conceptual preservation as applied to our programming practice.

## Why Preserve?

Conceptual Engineering involves taking a normative stance, asking what our concepts ought to be, rather than what they are. Frequently we find concepts that are deficient in some regard and we aim to fix them, or to use the term of the art to ameliorate them. But what if our concepts are good? What if we have found a concept that we think is beneficial to keep? Are we done with our conceptual engineering work? Not by any means, over time semantic drift is inevitable if our words and concepts aren't protected and preserved.

As programmers we tend to think that our responsibility is to write clear, clean code. If we do this, others will be able to understand our ideas and the codebase will be properly maintainable. Yet, this never seems to happen in practice. As others begin to contribute to our codebase our concepts become lost. No longer do our interfaces mean what they once meant. No longer do our concepts drive changes in the codebase. Instead people approach our codebase with entirely different preconcieved notions and ascribe a new meaning to our concepts. This meaning can start to catch on and now we have two different groups with to different conceptions of the same term. These competing conceptions reak havoc on our codebase.

We must work hard to preserve that concepts that matter. We must get them in others heads, we must teach others to act correctly in light of these concepts. A failure to preserve concepts can lead to undesirable effects. Think about how Alan Kay feels about the new understanding of Object Oriented Programming. Think about the way in which Agile has changed from something intended to help programmers, to something intended to micro-manage them. As programmers we must expand our notion of what is our responsibility. We must work hard to preserve our good concepts and change our bad ones.

## Easy Fixes That Don't Work

There are two solutions that might come to mind on ensuring concept preservation that I want to argue are dead-ends. First is the idea of self-documenting code, code that by it very nature ought to make our concepts clear. The second is actual documentation, whether that be in the form of docstrings, longform docs, architecture decision records, or any other format. Neither of these initiatives is enough to secure our concepts. To make this result a bit less surprising, consider the conceptual drift of English words. Does a dictionary prevent drift from occuring?

Let's tackle these in turn and show why they are insufficient. First, self-documenting code can definitely be a good goal. Writing clear variable and function names is fantastic and can certainly aid in comprehension. But no matter how clear our code is, it does not capture our concept completely. Our code underdetermines our concept. No matter what structure we give to our code, there will be multiple concepts of the code that are compatible with it. This is especially true at all the points of our code we have intentionally made extensible. Extensible code neccesarily allows our concepts to be open to drift overtime, this can be very good.

What about documentation proper? Of course our code undetermines our concepts. That is why we document it, describe background, talk about edge cases, discuss possible future extensions. It could be argued that our concepts are still undetermined,  by the documentation, but rather than do that let's take a different tact. Preserving a concept isn't merely to write it down, it is to ensuring that people who utilize this concept have in mind the same concept as what you intended. Further than that, it is that their actions are consistent with that conception. 

Imagine a codebase that follows the MVC pattern. Imagine that the codebase is heavily documented and has canonical definitions of Model, View, and Controller. There are two ways in which the concepts here can drift. First a team member may have misunderstood some distinction between View and Controller. When teaching these concepts to a junior engineer, they explain them incorrectly. This incorrect understanding spreads and makes its way to the whole team. In this group, our conception has changed despite our existing documentation. In fact, at some point, someone might even go and update the documentation with this new "correct" understanding. 

But concept preservation can fail even if no one has a different conception. Imagine the same codebase above, but this time all team members have internalized the same conception. If you asked them to explain MVC they'd give you the same explanations. But there is a team member who constantly makes a mistake of putting the wrong code in the wrong place. This isn't because of some bad conception, just a simple mistake. Over time others begin to follow this example as they create new code. This way of organizing code becomes habit. Here our internalized concept hasn't changed, and yet our practice reveals an inconsistency. We have in our actions allowed conceptual drift to occur.

## Practices for Preserving

To be clear, writing clean code and good documentaiton are good practices to help with concept preservation. They just aren't sufficient. Nor will they be as effective as they could be, if we don't consciously think about them as serving that purpose. The same applies to other practices. Code review is a fantastic place to help prevent conceptual drift. But many times it becomes about style over substance. Pair programming is great way to detect conceptual drift, it allows you to go beyond the code artifact and actually investigate peoples statements of their beliefs.

I'd imagine right now you can think of a number of practices that can be used here. Diagrams, presentations, glossaries, in general any presentation or explanation of our concepts can help us with preservation. But I want to stress that none of these things exhaust our concepts. Our concepts are in-extricably bound up in human-beings themselves. To be in possesion of a concept is not merely to be able to repeat it. It is to be able to act in certain ways, it is to be able to apply the concept in a number of different contexts. It is to be able to understand how the concept bares to counterfactual situations.

In other words, ensuring that others know facts about our concept is not enough to preserve it. This is a mistake software architects often make. An architect may give a presentation on the desired system architecture, they may write extensive documentation, ensure each team member can explain the architecture, and yet find that after the work has begun the system is entirely different than planned. Why is this? First it may be that despite a persons ability to articulate the infrastructure they do not have that deeper knowledge of how to make it reality. But it may also be that the architect has no done their job of convincing others.

## Persuade or Don't

Perserving our concepts requires persuasion. Merely building a big codebase of "best practices" or creating standard boilerplate for new projects does not actually get these concepts into other heads and help them live them out in their actions. Other engineers may disagree (and perhaps rightly so) with your conceptions. These engineers may intentionally cause these concepts to drift, twisting them until they fit the shape they were looking for. This is the inevitable outcome of forced concepts.

If we want to practice conceptual preservation, we must ask ourselves if our concepts are worth preserving. We must ask ourselves if others deem them to be so. We cannot preserve our concepts by fiat. No amount of power can keep a concept in place. So, if conceptual preservation is important to good codebases, we may want to reconsider our practices. Are architects a good solution to ensure quality? Is the blessed infrastracture team who imposses concepts a good idea? Perhaps not.