# Conceptual Engineering

Naming things is one of the hardest things to do in software. Why? Is it because all the names have been taken? Is it becasue we are trying to get at some essence that our words need to capture? (Like some sort of fantasy magic system.) Perhaps at times we feel both of these things. But I think that the difficulties we feel naming things stems from an unexpressed anxiety. Deep down we understand that naming is more than assigning a word to a value. When we are naming things, we aren't just deciding what something is, instead we are asking the question of what something should be.

Taking this normative stance, this view that we aren't merely trying to explain concepts, but trying to ask the question of what our concepts ought to be is called Conceptual Engineering. Conceptual Engineering here should be understood to include both working to change the meaning of existing concepts (re-engingeering) and creating new concepts for a given purpose (de novo engineering). Naming things is hard because in doing so, we know deep down that we are advocating for this concept. We are putting our weight behind this new concept, or in the redefinition (expansion or contraction) of an existing concept. This is a heavy burden to carry.

## Carrying the Burden

Code we call over-abstracted has often failed us by not carrying this burden well. But sometimes, we are also asking too much of this code. Concepts extend past their concrete uses. Our concept of justice for instance extends not only to concrete instances that have occured, but to hypotheticals. So too the concepts in our programs extend beyond the ways in which we have in fact employed them. More often than not, this is exactly why we have created the concept, to cover future uses we don't yet know.

Given this underdetermination of our code in defining the bounds of our concepts, what should we do? This depends on the circumstances we find ourselves in. Are we creators of these concepts, or consumers of them? As creators our work is by no means easy but straight forward. We are responsible for explaining our concept to others, for persuading others to adopt our approach, and to listen and consider feedback, refining our concepts as necessary. We are also responsible for considering if/when our concept has overstayed its welcome, when it is time to rid ourselves of this concept. In other words, we should take full responsibility for this concept.

This notion of responsibility is incredibly important. Our concepts, if used, have effects on others. They can enable, or constrain, they can free or restrict, they can bring joy or pain. Responsibility here doesn't mean that all reactions people have towards our concepts are our fault. Perhaps people have taken our concepts and misused or abused them. But it does mean that we ought to consider closely the potential consequences of our ideas. It further suggests that when need to consider how we will receive feedback about the effects our concepts have had on others. Here it might be useful think the enterprise architect whose position is to make decisions around concepts for others, impose them, and yet never have to live with their effects.

### Consuming Concepts

Being the consumer of a concept is often much harder than the creator. As creators we have certain leeway, we know the boundaries, we know where edges are vague and where they are exact. We are intimately familiar with our concepts (in other words, [we have a theory of them]()). As consumers, we are not affording these luxuries. Instead we are encounting a concept and trying to employ it to meet our purposes, often not knowing if this is or isn't a good idea.

Understanding of the norms of the person/community that has created this concept can be incredibly important for successful deployment. Does this concept have a canonical definition? Are there "laws" that apply the concept? What is the conceptual background from which this concept was born? Is there family of related concepts to which this concept belongs? These sorts of questions will helps us ensure we do not misuse the concept.

Given all these constraints, how to precede is far from straight forward and often requires careful consideration and good amount of taste. What do we do when we find a mismatch between our purpose and the current bounds of a concept? Should we choose some different existing concept, create a wholly new concept, work to extend the bounds of the concept, or change our purpose? Each of these responses (and more besides) can be the correct move to take. When the mismatch between our purposes and our candidate concept are serious and irreconcilable, it is often the correct course of action to search for a different existing concept. But knowing when something is irreconcilable is the trick.

#### Responding to Change

As for our other options, we have briefly discussed creating above so we won't add more here. That leaves expansion of the concept, and revising of our purposes. Let's begin with the latter. Changing our purposes seems like a rather odd decision to make in light of finding a mismatch between our purposes and some existing concept. Yet, it can often be the right move if we realize that our purpose wasn't independently chosen, but was actually chosen in part because of our misunderstanding of the concept at hand. Imagine we are looking to change some software to meet a business need. We decide to split some part into two by applying a given existing concept in our codebase. So, our immediate purpose is to split something, that was unified, into two parts, but why did we choose to do this? Because of our understanding of the codebase, including our understanding of the concept at hand. When we discover the mismatch, we ought to abandon our immediate purpose and keep in mind our ultimate purpose here, meeting the business need.

This process of updating our purposes as our understanding of concepts expands is incredibly important. But so too, is it important to consider expansion of our concepts as our purposes change. Our concepts are under-determined by their instances, but more than that their boundaries are fuzzy in many dimensions. Over time we ought to reconsider these edges in light of our present purposes and knowledge. Introducing new concepts is an expensive task; expanding an existing one can be advantageous. When extending an existing concept, we can rely on existing ideas about the concept to help us transfer knowledge to our new extension making the learning curve much less steep. A fantastic example of this is the way in which video game level design can help us discover a new use for an old mechanic that we never had considered before.

## Learning from Others

The framework here is rather abstract, and yet I doubt unfamiliar to programmers who have found themselves working in codebases developed by many people over a long period of time. A major part of programming is not just the writing of code, but the understanding, creating, and modifying of concepts. We often find ourselves frustrated in codebases where the various dimensions of concepts have not been properly attended to.

There is more to be said about many of the things mentioned here. For example, how can we understand a concept by reading code and whatever documentation might exist when these things undetermined the concept at hand? How can understanding norms of a community or the intentions of an author help us here? How can we be sure we are doing justice to a concept in our extension of it? All of these questions and more deserve to be explored. The first step to doing so is to recognize Conceptual Engineering as a crucial part of what we do when engineering a codebase. Creating a codebase is not merely the creation of a bunch of textual artifacts. The norms and intentions we impose on this text is a crucial part of it. The concepts we create, reuse, or modify are incredibly important. If we want to be better programmers, we need to attend to our concepts and consider the question, what should this concept be.

Most importantly though, we aren't in this alone. While our purposes may be particular to our craft, the process is not. We can learn from the philosophers who have explored Conceptual Engineering directly. But we can also share our own experiences, helping to bring our own perspective out into the broader world.

